EDITORIAL

Editorial: Reducing risks to cities from disasters and
climate change
SALEEMUL HUQ, SARI KOVATS, HANNAH REID and DAVID SATTERTHWAITE

I. INTRODUCTION
The lives and livelihoods of hundreds of millions
of people will be affected by what is done (or not
done) in cities with regard to climate change
over the next 5–10 years. As the paper by Patricia
Romero Lankao points out, cities are key players
both in the generation of greenhouse gases and
in strategies to reduce this generation, especially
in reducing our dependence on carbon-based
fuels. Cities also concentrate a large proportion
of those most at risk from the effects of climate
change. While the need for city governments and
civil society groups to act to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions is well established – and with many
city governments in Europe and North America
already acting on this – the need to act to reduce
vulnerability to climate change is not. In addition, most of the cities (and nations) that face
the highest risks from the negative effects of
climate change are those with almost negligible
contributions to atmospheric greenhouse gases.
Take, for instance, Cotonou, the economic
capital of Benin, with around one million inhabitants, whose vulnerability to climate change
is described in the paper by Krystel Dossou and
Saleemul Huq, Hannah Reid and David Satterthwaite
are at the International Institute for Environment and
Development (IIED); Saleemul Huq and Hannah Reid with
the Climate Change Group, David Satterthwaite with the
Human Settlements Group. Sari Kovats is with the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Saleemul Huq,
Sari Kovats and David Satterthwaite also contribute to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Working
Group II.
Acknowledgement: The editorial team is grateful to
Saleemul Huq, Hannah Reid and Sari Kovats for their help
in developing this edition. Thanks are also due to: Hannah
Griffiths and Ernesto Jose Lopez for their help in preparing
the Book Notes; Jessica Budds for her translation of the
paper by Mauricio Domínguez Aguilar and Ana García
de Fuentes, and for her help in editing it; Jean Lubbock for
her translation of the paper by Krystel M R Dossou and
Bernadette Gléhouenou-Dossou; and Graham Bowden for
graphics work in various of the papers.

Bernadette Gléhouenou-Dossou. In 2004, average emissions of carbon dioxide per person in
Benin were around one-fiftieth that in highincome nations – or one-eightieth that in the
USA.(1) Like many cities on the coast of West
Africa, large parts of Cotonou’s economy and
residential neighbourhoods are particularly
vulnerable to sea-level rise and storm surges.
Some roads, beaches and buildings have already
been destroyed by the regression of the coastline
in the last 10 years.
Many other cities in Africa are also at risk
from sea-level rise and storm surges. Half of the
continent’s 37 “million cities” are either within
or have parts that are within the low elevation
coastal zone. Banjul, Lagos and Alexandria are
among the cities most at risk, although many
others are also likely to face much increased risks
from storms and flooding – but because of the
lack of local analysis, the scale of these risks has
yet to be documented.(2)
Many Asian cities are also particularly at
risk. Asia has many of the world’s largest cities/
metropolitan areas that are in the floodplains
of major rivers (e.g. the Ganges–Brahmaputra,
the Mekong and the Yangtze) and cycloneprone coastal areas (the Bay of Bengal, the South
China Sea, Japan and the Philippines).The IPCC
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
has emphasized how river deltas are among
the world’s most valuable, heavily populated
1. In this editorial, figures for carbon dioxide emissions per person
are drawn from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators
On-line, accessible at http://www.worldbank.org/reference/.
2. IPCC Special Report on the Regional Impacts of Climate Change;
An Assessment of Vulnerability, accessible at http://www.grida.
no/climate/ipcc/regional/index.htm.
3. Chapter 6 on Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems, in IPCC
(2001), Climate Change 2001; Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,
Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1,032 pages.

Environment & Urbanization Copyright © 2007 International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
Vol 19(1): 3–15. DOI: 10.1177/0956247807078058 www.sagepublications.com

3

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

and vulnerable coastal systems.(3) The paper
by Mozaharul Alam and MD Golam Rabbani
describes the vulnerability of Dhaka, the capital in
Bangladesh, to flooding. Dhaka has over 10 million inhabitants and is central to Bangladesh’s
economy (and its economic success in recent
years). This is a city already very vulnerable to
flooding – as shown by the devastation and very
large economic losses from floods in 1988, 1998
and 2004. Large sections of the city are only a
few metres above sea level. Much of Bangladesh
outside of Dhaka is also very vulnerable to floods –
and the combination of sea-level rise and increased frequency and intensity of storms that
climate change is likely to bring greatly increases
these risks. Yet in 2004, the average contribution
of each Bangladeshi to carbon dioxide emissions
was also around one-fiftieth that in high-income
nations – or one-eightieth that in the USA.
Mumbai and Shanghai are also very vulnerable to storms and sea-level rise, as described in
the paper by Alex de Sherbinin, Andrew Schiller
and Alex Pulsipher. As in Dhaka, large sections of
these cities are only 1 to 5 metres above sea level.
Much of central Mumbai is built on landfill –
the city developed on seven islands, which
joined into a single landmass over time, as the
city expanded. Mumbai is also likely to suffer
from more serious storm surges and increased
frequency and intensity of extreme weather
(cyclones) as a result of climate change. The likely
long-term trend of sea-level rise is likely to prove
very damaging for Mumbai as this, combined
with storm surges, may make large areas of the
city uninhabitable. Perhaps not surprisingly, it is
mostly low-income households living in informal
or illegal settlements that face the greatest risks
from flooding.
Although in aggregate, China and India are
major contributors to global greenhouse gas emissions, emissions per person of carbon dioxide are
still relatively small – for India less than onetenth the average per person in high-income
nations; for China about one-fifth. In addition,
their contribution to greenhouse gases already
released is much smaller. If a global agreement
was to be reached to reduce total greenhouse gas
emissions by the amount needed to minimize
potentially damaging levels of global warming,
by allocating each person a “carbon” budget,
both China and India would still be well below
their allocation.

4

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

II. WHAT ARE THE RISKS FROM
CLIMATE CHANGE?
For cities, perhaps the most obvious increased risk
from climate change comes from the increased
number and intensity of extreme weather events
such as heavy rainstorms, cyclones and hurricanes.
The cities most at risk are the cities where these
events are already common – although there is
some evidence that the geographic range of
some extreme weather events is expanding. For
any city, the scale of the risk from these extreme
weather events is also much influenced by the
quality of housing and infrastructure in that city
and how well prepared the city’s population and
key emergency services are. Generally, cities in
high-income nations have had their risks much
reduced as a result of decades of investment in
housing and infrastructure.
But the devastation of New Orleans by
Hurricane Katrina in 2005 is an example of how,
even in high-income nations, flood defences and
well-resourced emergency services can be overwhelmed (and how the poorer citizens are the
ones most affected). Although buildings and
infrastructure are often built to withstand extreme
weather events of an intensity judged to be very
unlikely (i.e. once in 1,000 years), these can still
be overwhelmed by the increased intensity of
storms or of associated rainfall. In many cities,
there is already evidence that what used to be a
“once in a 100 year event” is becoming more
common. In addition, cities are also vulnerable
to any damage to the larger systems on which
they depend – for instance, water supply and
treatment, transport and electricity (and thus
everything that depends on electricity, including
lighting, pumping and communications).
It is worth noting the scale of the devastation
from some recent extreme weather events. The
issue with these is not so much that “these are
proof of climate change” (which is difficult to
ascertain) but rather, proof of the vulnerability
of cities and smaller settlements to extreme
weather events – for example, the devastation
brought by Hurricane Mitch to Central America
in 1998 (thousands killed, millions homeless,
billions of dollars worth of damage to already
fragile economies);(4) or the devastation brought
4. EM–DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database,
accessible at www.em-dat.net, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium.

EDITORIAL

by flooding in and around Caracas in Venezuela
in 1999 (around 30,000 people killed, some
600,000 others seriously affected). The Tsunami
in late 2004, which killed over 200,000 people
and destroyed the homes and livelihoods of millions, was not related to climate change – but it
was a demonstration of the vulnerability of so
many urban (and rural) areas on the coast.(5)
There are also many other risks from climate
change that are less dramatic but nonetheless
very serious, especially for low-income groups.
Climate change will bring changes in rainfall
patterns, both in terms of how much rain each area
receives and its distribution over the year. Some
areas will become wetter and others drier. Many
cities will get less precipitation (and have more
constrained freshwater sources). This implies
a need to adapt water supply systems, as well
as drainage systems, and this is discussed in
the paper by Mike Muller, which focuses on
how water management must change in subSaharan Africa. At least 14 African nations are
already facing water stress or water scarcity,
and many more are likely to join this list in
the next 10–20 years. There is already a failure
to manage water resources well in much of this
region, independent of climate change. It is an
area where around half the urban population
already lack adequate provision for water and
sanitation, although this is linked far more to
inadequate governance than to water shortages.(6)
Mike Muller’s paper also points to one of the
difficulties in addressing this: the uncertainties
within each locality of what changes are likely
and the difficulties of incorporating this into
water infrastructure investment planning, as the
useful life of large water infrastructure is often
measured in hundreds of years. Uncertainty
about changing flood risk can lead to over-design,
which is expensive, or under-design, with serious
implications for risk.
It is not yet possible to predict with any precision how climate change will affect each
particular place or sector – whether by downscaling
global climate change models or extrapolating
from past experiences with climate variation. In
addition, there are multiple interactions between

different vulnerabilities – as discussed in the
paper by Alex de Sherbinin, Andrew Schiller and
Alex Pulsipher, which can produce a variety of
unanticipated effects.
Most cities will experience more heat waves
and more problems with certain air pollutants; for
larger, denser cities, the temperatures in central
“heat islands” can be several degrees higher than
in surrounding areas. Many tourist cities on the
coast will have their “tourist assets” damaged
because of flood damage to coastal reefs and
loss of beaches. Warmer average temperatures
will allow an expansion of the area where many
“tropical” diseases can occur – for instance,
where mosquitoes that spread malaria, dengue
fever and filariasis can survive and breed.(7)
Many city economies will suffer from decreasing possibilities for agriculture in their
surrounds – both as local supplies diminish and
as local farmers’ incomes (and thus spending
on goods and services within the city) decrease.
Generally “urban” issues and “rural” issues are
discussed as if they were somehow separate. But
a considerable part of the urban population in
low- and middle-income nations derive their
livelihoods from producing or selling goods and
from providing services to rural producers or
inhabitants. There are also the obvious rural–
urban links for all industries that rely on crops or
forest products as inputs. Thus support for rural
populations and production systems to reduce
their vulnerability to climate change is important
for urban livelihoods and economies – just as
protecting urban economies and livelihoods is
important for so many rural households whose
livelihoods depend on goods sold to urban populations or whose incomes are in part derived from
household members working in urban areas.

III. FLOODING
Climate change has the potential to increase
flooding risks in a number of ways: from the sea
(higher sea levels and storm surges); from glacial
lake outburst (a problem in countries such as
Nepal); and from rainfall – for instance, heavier
rainfall or rainfall that is more prolonged than
in the past. For some cities and regions, climate

5. See reference 4.
6. UN–Habitat (2003), Water and Sanitation in the World’s Cities;
Local Action for Global Goals, Earthscan Publications, London, 274
pages.

7. WHO (1992), Our Planet, Our Health, World Health Organization,
Geneva.

5

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

change is likely to reduce annual average rainfall –
but this does not necessarily mean reduced risk
of flooding, because the reduced rainfall may be
more concentrated.
For most of the cities with increased levels
of flooding risk induced directly or indirectly
by climate change, this comes on top of already
serious deficiencies in provision for storm
drainage. A recently published study by ActionAid, Unjust Waters, documents the lack of provision in six African cities for reducing flood
risks or for managing floods when they occur.(8)
Floods are already having very severe impacts on
cities, smaller urban centres and rural areas in
many African nations – for example, the floods
in Mozambique in 2000, which included heavy
flooding in Maputo; the floods in Algiers in
2001 (with around 900 people killed and 45,000
affected); heavy rains in East Africa in 2002 that
brought floods and mudslides and forced tens
of thousands to leave their homes in Rwanda,
Kenya, Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda; and the
very serious floods in Port Harcourt and in Addis
Ababa in 2006.
Discussions with residents in informal settlements in various African cities concluded that
flooding is more frequent and intense, and often
occurs in locations that previously were not at
risk. It also emerged how little local government
was doing to address these issues. There is an
obvious need in most cities for far better drainage,
including maintenance of existing drains –
whether or not climate change is increasing risks
from flooding.
Concerning Asia, the massive floods in Dhaka
have already been mentioned. Mumbai had very
serious floods in 2005, which left over 1,000
dead and massive damage to people’s homes,
livelihoods and asset bases. Jakarta (and other
areas in Indonesia) suffered very serious floods in
February 2007. And of course, for every flood that
is large enough to get noticed internationally,
there are dozens or hundreds that do not get
counted as a “disaster”, yet they kill and seriously
injure many people and destroy or damage many
people’s homes and assets.(9)
8. A summary of this report will be published in the October 2007
issue of Environment & Urbanization. The report can be obtained
from ActionAid and is also downloadable from its website at www.
actionaid.org.
9. The October 2007 issue of Environment & Urbanization will
include a case study of flood risks in unplanned settlements in
Lusaka, Zambia, by Wilma S Nchito.

6

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

Urban areas always present some risk of
flooding when rainfall occurs. Buildings, roads,
infrastructure and other paved areas in cities
prevent rainfall from infiltrating the soil – thus
producing more run-off. In well-governed cities
this is rarely a problem, because good provision
for storm and surface drainage can easily be built
into the urban fabric, along with complementary
measures to protect from flooding – for instance,
the use of parks and other areas of open space as
places to safely accommodate flood waters from
unusually serious storms. But in poorly governed
cities, this does not happen – and it is common
for buildings or infrastructure to be constructed
that actually obstruct natural drainage channels.
In rapidly growing cities, it is common for natural
drainage channels to be built over. For example,
the paper on Dhaka points out that buildings
often encroach on or fill in drains, and many
natural drains have been filled up to construct
roads. Heavy and/or prolonged rainfall produces
very large volumes of surface water in any city,
which can so easily overwhelm drainage systems –
especially if there is inadequate provision for
drains or if the drains have not been maintained
(for instance, many are full of silt or clogged with
garbage).

IV. THE URBAN POPULATION AT RISK IN
COASTAL ZONES
It is difficult to estimate with any precision
how many people are at risk from the increased
frequency and intensity of extreme weather
events and the sea-level rise that climate change
will bring. The paper by Gordon McGranahan,
Deborah Balk and Bridget Anderson presents
the first detailed analysis, based on data for each
nation, of the number and proportion of urban
dwellers (and total populations) living in the
low elevation coastal zone (LECZ). This zone –
the continuous area along the coast that is less
than 10 metres above sea level – represents 2 per
cent of the world’s land area but contains 10 per
cent of its total population (i.e. over 600 million
people) and 13 per cent of its urban population
(representing around 360 million people). Almost
two-thirds of the world’s large cities with more
than 5 million inhabitants fall at least partly
within this zone. Low-income and lower-middle
income nations have a higher proportion of their
urban population in this zone than high-income

EDITORIAL

nations. The least-developed nations, on average,
have a higher proportion of their total population
in this zone than high-income nations; they also
have nearly twice the proportion of their urban
population in this zone, compared to high-income
nations. Figures 1 and 2 show the10 nations with
the largest urban populations and those with the
largest proportion of their urban population in
this zone.
Obviously, only a proportion of those within
this zone are at risk from the sea-level rises
that are likely within the next 30–50 years.
Estimates for sea-level rise vary between 18 and
59 centimetres by the end of the twenty-first
century; this will certainly multiply the number
of people flooded by storm surges. One estimate
suggested that some 10 million people are currently affected each year by coastal flooding
and that this number will increase under all
the climate change scenarios.(10) The problems
with coastal flooding would obviously be much
more serious if certain potentially catastrophic
events, whose probability is uncertain, were to
occur – for instance, the accelerated melting of
10. Nicholls R J (2004), “Coastal flooding and wetland loss in the
21st century: changes under the SRES climate and socioeconomic
scenarios”, Global Environmental Change Vol 14, No 1, pages
69–86.

Greenland’s ice sheet or the collapse of the west
Antarctic ice sheet.
The paper by Gordon McGranahan, Deborah
Balk and Bridget Anderson also notes how
there appears to be increasing population concentrations in low elevation coastal zones in
most nations. China provides the most dramatic
example, as it is the nation with the largest
number of urban and rural dwellers in the low
elevation coastal zone and it still has a very
strong trend towards increasing population concentration in this zone. Increasing trade and
market-driven movements, often supported by
government incentives, are still attracting people
to the coast. The coastal provinces of China,
for example, experienced a net in-migration of
about 17 million people between 1995 and 2000,
creating pressures in an already crowded coastal
zone.

V. WHO IS MOST AT RISK?
In general, the people most at risk from climate
change are those living in affected areas who:
• are least able to avoid the direct or indirect
impacts (e.g. by having good quality homes

FIGURE 1

FIGURE 2

Nations with the largest urban
populations in the Low Elevation
Coastal Zone (LECZ)

Nations with the highest proportion of their
urban populations in the Low Elevation
Coastal Zone (LECZ)

NOTE: In Figure 2, countries with an urban population of fewer than 100,000 were excluded from the list.
SOURCE: These figures were prepared by Gordon McGranahan, Deborah Balk and Bridget Anderson from the
GRUMP database; see their paper for more details of the methodology and the source.

7

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

and drainage systems that prevent flooding;
by moving to places with less risk; or by
changing jobs if climate change threatens
their livelihoods);
• are likely to be most affected by them (for
instance, infants and older groups less able to
cope with heat waves); and
• are least able to cope with the illness, injury,
premature death or loss of income, livelihood
or property caused by the impacts.
Generally, wealth allows individuals and
households to reduce these risks – for instance,
by having safer housing, choosing safer jobs or
locations to live in, and protecting their wealth
by insuring assets that are at risk. Also, having
assets that help with recovery. Low-income
groups have far less scope to reduce the risks and
many live in the areas most at risk. Indeed, for
most cities in Africa, Asia and Latin America, lowincome groups not only live in settlements with
the worst quality housing and least provision
for drainage but also in the districts most at risk
from floods and landslides. The more dangerous
sites are often the only sites where lower-income
groups can find housing they can afford or can
build their own homes.(11)
The quality of government – both at the
national level and, as crucially, at the local
(district or municipal) level – also has a very large
influence on the level of risk from climate change
faced by those with limited incomes or assets. For
instance, the quality of government influences
the quality of provision for infrastructure (which
should limit risks of flooding for the whole city
area, not just for the wealthier areas), for disaster
preparedness (including warnings, measures
taken to limit damage and, if needed, good provision to help people move to safer areas quickly)
and for disaster response (for example, rescue
services and appropriate emergency and health
care services and programmes, to help those who
lost their homes and livelihoods to rebuild these).
The potential “co-benefits” from investments to
improve living conditions and to reduce risks
from climate change are obvious. However, much
current city development increases risks from
climate change – for instance, by not preventing
new development on areas at risk of flooding
11. Hardoy, Jorge E, Diana Mitlin and David Satterthwaite (2001),
Environmental Problems in an Urbanizing World: Finding Solutions
for Cities in Africa, Asia and Latin America, Earthscan Publications,
London, 448 pages.

8

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

(and not providing alternative, safer sites for lowincome groups), and by not protecting areas that
should be left undeveloped because these help
buffer flooding risks (for example, wetlands).
Climate will never be the main driver of urban
growth but the drivers of urban growth have to
be adjusted to make them take account of climate
change risks, as well as better address the needs of
low-income groups. This will not be done by the
market, and can only be done by governments
working with, and accountable to, those who are
most at risk.
But how is this possible when most local
governments are weak and ineffective – and often
refuse to allow any public services or investments
in informal/illegal settlements, even when these
house one-third to one-half of the entire city’s
population and workforce. Christine Wamsler’s
paper gives a clear indication of the difficulties in
getting appropriate risk reduction action for
lower-income groups in any city. Drawing on
interviews and discussions with people living
in 15 disaster-prone “slum” communities in
El Salvador and with local organizations, these
difficulties became apparent. Low-income households recognized that flooding and landslides
were the most serious risks to their lives
and livelihoods, although earthquakes and
windstorms, the lack of job opportunities and
water provision, and insecurity due to violent
juvenile crimes were also highlighted. These
households also invested in risk reduction and,
on average, spent 9 per cent of their incomes
doing so. Many took measures to lower risks –
for instance, diversifying their livelihoods, or
having easily sold assets should a disaster occur.
Remittances from family members working
abroad were important for many families, especially in providing support for recovery after a
disaster. But a complex range of issues limits their
effectiveness – for instance, the individualistic
nature of households’ investments, the lack of
representative community organizations through
which to design and implement settlementwide measures, and the lack of support from
government agencies (most residents viewed
local and national governments as unhelpful or
even a hindrance to their efforts). Meanwhile,
most of the institutions that supported social
housing and housing finance initiatives – local
and international NGOs, government agencies
– did not consider risk reduction in detail.
Although their programmes usually supported

EDITORIAL

safer houses, which reduced risks in the event of
a disaster, they did nothing to support insurance
or to enhance family or community capacity for
recovery. There is a need to support the capacity
to work collectively, so that each household’s
individual efforts contribute to community-wide
risk reduction (individual investments can often
increase risks for others); there is also a need for
local governments that can be trusted and, often,
good professional advice on the cheapest ways to
secure and protect homes.

VI. WHY CITIES DEVELOP ON RISKY SITES
Many cities are located on dangerous sites with
regard to risks from storms and floods. This
took place completely independently of climate
change – but climate change has increased the
level of risk and the number of people at risk. There
are four main reasons why so many cities are on
dangerous sites. The first is that these locations
were attractive to those who originally founded
and developed the city – for instance, because of
a good river or sea harbour, or a strategic location
with regard to trade or territorial control, or
a ready supply of fresh water, or a fertile delta.
Most of the world’s major cities are on the coast
or beside major rivers because they were already
important urban centres before railways and road
and air transport changed transport systems.
Most relied on river or sea ports as their main
transport and communication link with other
places – and, of course, ocean transport is still a
key part of the increasingly globalized economy.
The second reason is that the original city
site was often safe but the city has now outgrown this site and expanded onto land that
is at risk – for example onto floodplains or on
unstable hillsides or mountains.(12) The third
reason is that once a city has developed, it rarely
disappears, even if it experiences some disastrous
flood or earthquake – because there are too many
individuals, enterprises and institutions with
an interest in that city’s economy. The fourth
reason is that in most cities at risk from floods,
the wealthier groups and most formal enterprises
do not face serious risks.
The spatial distribution of urban populations in any nation is not the result of any

12. See reference 11.

careful plan to guide urban expansion to “safe”
sites. The main driver of city expansion (or
stagnation or contraction) is where new or
expanding profit-seeking enterprises choose to
concentrate (or avoid). This is also largely true
for how each individual urban centre develops
– as the localities or districts within and around
the urban centre with the most rapidly growing
populations are associated with where new or
expanding economic activities concentrate.
However, the physical growth of the urban
centre is also influenced by where lower-income
groups can (or cannot) get accommodation or
land on which to build housing.(13) Attempts by
governments to change the spatial distribution
of their urban populations or of the economic
activities that underpin urban development can
impose high economic costs – as this undermines
the economic success of enterprises. Large public
investments in infrastructure and expensive
financial incentives in locations judged to be
“desirable” by governments may fail to attract
much investment; or the locations that get such
preferential support are more determined by the
political power of the politicians that represent
them than by any potential to attract new
investment – a problem that is also evident in
high-income nations.
So in seeking to understand the links between city development and risk from climate
change, one of the key issues is – to what extent
are profit-seeking enterprises influenced in their
choice of location by climate change-related
risks? Obviously, private enterprises will not generally invest in sites that are risky – unless the
risk can be reduced by insurance, or the risk does
not actually threaten their production (in most
cities on risky sites, it is particular geographic
areas and particular population groups – usually
low-income groups – that are most at risk).(14)
In addition, if risks from climate change are
seen as distant threats that may affect city sites
20 or 50 or more years in the future, then this
will not provide much discouragement to invest,
especially in successful cities. Dhaka, Mumbai
and Shanghai have attracted much private
investment despite their vulnerability to storms
and sea-level rise.
13. See the paper in this issue by Haroldo Torres, Humberto Alves
and Maria Aparecida de Oliveira.
14. See reference 11.

9

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

But larger companies and corporations also
have far more possibilities to move when risk
levels increase – in ways that most individuals,
households and local enterprises do not. It is
possible to envisage a trend in new investments
by larger companies and corporations away from
cities and city sites most at risk from floods and
storms, which will hardly affect their operations.
They have long been adept at shifting production
to locations where profits are maximized, and it
is easy for them to factor in risks from climate
change. But it is difficult to conceive of how many
of the largest and most successful coastal cities
that are most at risk from storms and sea-level rise
will manage. As papers in this issue make clear,
cities such as Mumbai, Shanghai and Dhaka are
very vulnerable to sea-level rise. All are very large
(each has well over 10 million inhabitants), all
have had considerable economic success in the
last few decades, all are very important to their
nations’ economies and cultures, all concentrate
very large investments and economic interests.
So what long-term perspectives can guide
settlement/urban development away from
the urban centres or urban zones most at risk
from storms and floods, without threatening a
nation’s economic success? One of the most important factors is to remove a key constraint on
new investments away from cities on the coast,
namely the weakness of local governments in
urban centres or zones in less risky locations.
More competent and effective city and municipal
governments in urban centres or zones outside the more risky locations will allow these
locations to compete for new investments – and
this has been a factor in developing less primate
city-dominated urban systems in many middleincome nations. Of the many new economic
activities currently concentrating in coastal locations at risk from storms and sea-level rise, a
significant proportion do not require a coastal
location, but are concentrating there because
of other supporting factors – for instance, good
infrastructure and services and easy access to
government (perhaps an important source of
business). This is obviously far more amenable to
change than where businesses (and workforces)
concentrate on coasts because of (for instance)
port activities, fishing and coastal tourism. It is
also likely that insurance cover will influence
spatial location for both businesses and home
owners that can afford it, as the cost of insurance rises in locations where the frequency and

10

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

intensity of storms and floods is increasing or
likely to increase; it may be that insurance cover
will not be available in increasing numbers of
coastal locations.
There is also the dramatic difference in the
speed at which climate change is changing risk
maps and the speed of adaptation. The speed at
which city systems change to reflect the new “risk
map” from climate change is likely to be slow in
relation to how rapidly this “risk map” is likely
to change – especially if no global agreements are
in place within the next few years to halt and
then reduce global greenhouse gas emissions.
Part of this is because powerful economic and
political interests want “their city” to continue.
Large cities, once developed, acquire a capacity
to remain as cities, even as their economic base
declines. There are surprisingly few “great cities”
from history that aren’t still cities (even if their
relative importance may have changed). Did the
obvious and well-documented risk that New
Orleans faced before Katrina actually cause many
enterprises to move? New Orleans also faced an
additional difficulty in that a high proportion of
its economic base is related to its historic city and
its rich culture, and this cannot be moved. Venice
is at high risk from sea-level rise and storms – but
Venice cannot be “moved”. Nor can Alexandria.
Many of the sites most at risk from sea-level rise
in many coastal cities are also among the most
desirable residential areas and areas for popular
recreation.
There is also the issue of how the political
economy of any city influences what is done and
what is likely to be done to reduce risks from
climate change-related impacts. A city as wealthy
and successful as Mumbai has resources that
could have done far more to reduce the risks
from flooding (better drains, better garbage collection systems, ensuring poorer groups could
find land for housing that was not on land at
high risk from flooding, etc.). Why this was not
done needs exploring. In part, it is because most
of the risks from flooding are borne by lowerincome groups. But cities such as Mumbai can
invest in protection against floods and sea-level
rise in ways that have strong “co-benefits” with
development, as this also improves the homes
and neighbourhoods of the millions of lowincome households. They can greatly reduce
risks by ensuring that low-income households
can find and afford housing or land on which
they can build on sites less at risk from flooding.

EDITORIAL

15. Patel, Sheela, Celine d’Cruz and Sundar Burra (2002), “Beyond
evictions in a global city; people-managed resettlement in
Mumbai”, Environment & Urbanization Vol 14, No 1, April,
pages 159–172.

also implementing many upgrading and newhouse developments. Some city and national
governments have recognized that these can be
powerful and very effective partners in improving
living conditions.(17) There are also many other
civil society organizations that can help ensure
that city planning and investment are less antipoor and anti-environment. The institutional
profile in this issue of the Urban Resource Centre
(URC) in Karachi by Arif Hasan has considerable relevance to this. It shows the influence
on urban planning in Karachi of a small NGO
founded by teachers, professionals, students,
activists and community organizations from
low-income settlements. The URC’s influence
lies in the creation of an information base about
Karachi’s development on which everyone can
draw, combined with research and analysis of
government plans (and their implications for
Karachi’s citizens), advocacy, mobilization of
communities, and drawing key government staff
and the media into discussions. The network that
the URC has built has successfully challenged
many government plans that are ineffective,
over-expensive and anti-poor, and it has devised
and promoted alternatives. It shows how the
questioning of government plans in an informed
manner by a large number of interest groups,
community organizations, NGOs, academics,
political parties and the media can force the government to listen and make modifications to its
plans, projects and investments. Comparable
urban resource centres have also been set up in
other cities in Pakistan and in other nations.
Another paper in this issue that is of great
relevance to reducing risks from climate change
(and other hazards), but that is not actually on
climate change, is the paper by Edésio Fernandes
on implementing the urban reform agenda in
Brazil. This describes the urban reform process in
Brazil and its legal and institutional innovations
since the promulgation of the 1988 Federal
Constitution. These include the 2001 City Statute
and the creation of the Ministry of Cities and
the National Council of Cities in 2003. As the

16. Menegat, Rualdo (2002), “Participatory democracy and
sustainable development: integrated urban environmental
management in Porto Alegre, Brazil”, Environment & Urbanization
Vol 14, No 2, October, pages 181–206; also Souza, Celina (2001),
“Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities
in building democratic institutions”, Environment & Urbanization
Vol 13, No 1, April, pages 159–184; and Cabannes, Yves (2004),
“Participatory budgeting: a significant contribution to participatory
democracy”, Environment & Urbanization Vol 16, No 1, April,
pages 27–46.

17. See case studies of federations in the Philippines, India and
Zimbabwe in Environment & Urbanization Vol 13, No 2 (October
2001); see also Weru, Jane (2004), “Community federations and
city upgrading: the work of Pamoja Trust and Muungano in Kenya”,
Environment & Urbanization Vol 16, No 1, April, pages 47–62. The
October 2007 issue will include a profile of the Malawi Homeless
People’s Federation. See also www.sdinet.org for up-to-date
profiles of the different federations.

Or the city can ensure that its investments do
exactly the opposite, as informal settlements at
risk of flooding are bulldozed and no measures
are taken to provide their inhabitants with alternative housing. Or if some provision is made for
re-housing, this further impoverishes those who
are forced to move, as they are dumped in distant
locations, far from their sources of livelihood and
social networks. As the risks facing so many major
coastal cities in Africa, Asia, and Latin America
and the Caribbean become evident, one of the
greatest worries is that this will draw attention
and investment away from the unfulfilled development needs.
So if city and national governments and
international agencies do begin to factor climate change-related risk reduction into their
urban policies, how can this avoid further disadvantaging the urban poor? How can the
interests of those who live in the informal
settlements and work in the informal economy
come to represent a sufficiently potent political
force to get risk reduction investments that
benefit them? How can the inhabitants of
informal settlements most at risk from flooding
get to influence “solutions”? There are examples
of how this can be done. For instance, there are
precedents for the relocation of those living in
informal settlements on risky sites, in which the
inhabitants of these settlements and their own
representative organizations were fully involved
in where, when and how they were moved.(15)
There are also the political innovations that
have given low-income groups more influence
over public investment decisions and brought
greater accountability to them in how government resources are used.(16) There are also
many examples of federations formed by groups
of slum and shack dwellers or homeless groups
that are pushing pro-poor political changes and

11

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

author notes, while recognizing the limitations
in these innovations, and the many issues that
still need to be addressed, this is an important
example of a national government striving to
provide city governments with the legal and
institutional base they need to be more effective
and more accountable to their citizens. Without
this, it will not be possible to reverse the spatial
and social exclusion that has characterized most
urban development in Brazil in recent decades.
Nor will it be possible for most city governments
to be effective in reducing risks associated with
climate change in ways that also benefit poorer
groups.

VII. THE UNFAIRNESS WITH REGARD TO
WHO CAUSES THE PROBLEMS AND WHO
IS MOST AFFECTED
There is a profound unfairness globally between
those who cause climate change and those
who are most at risk from its effects. This can
be seen in three aspects. First, with regard to
people, it is the high-consumption lifestyles of
the wealthy (and the production systems that
profit from their consumption) that drive climate
change;(18) it is mostly low-income groups in
low- and middle-income nations with negligible
contributions to climate change that are most
at risk from its impacts. Second, with regard to
nations, it is within the wealthiest nations that
most greenhouse gases have been emitted but
it is mostly low- and middle-income nations
that are bearing and will bear most of the costs.
Third, with regard to cities, larger companies and
corporations can easily adjust to new patterns of
risk induced by climate change and can move
their offices and production facilities away
from cities at risk. But cities cannot move. And
all cities have within them the homes, cultural
and financial assets, and livelihoods of their
inhabitants, much of which cannot be moved.

18. This statement might be considered to understate the role
of industry or particular sectors such as fossil fuel-powered
electricity generation but their production (and the climate change
implications of their production) are underpinned by consumer
demand, much of it from those with high-consumption lifestyles.
It might also be considered to understate the contributions of
middle-income groups in high-income nations, but these are
among the wealthy if the whole planet’s population is considered.

12

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

There are figures to show the dramatic differences between nations in the average contributions per person to greenhouse gas emissions,
and some were noted above – for example, the
80-fold difference between that in the USA and
many low-income nations. But these actually
understate the scale of these differentials. Greenhouse gas emissions in high-income nations are
kept down by the fact that they import many of
the energy-intensive goods used or consumed
by their citizens and businesses. In addition,
a concentration on comparing “averages” for
nations obscures just how much the wealthy
groups drive the problem. The differentials in
greenhouse gas emissions per person between
rich and poor groups can be much larger than
the differentials between rich and poor nations.
For instance, the greenhouse gas emissions
generated as a result of the high-consumption
lifestyle of someone like Donald Trump are likely
to be hundreds of thousands, or even millions,
of times more than that generated by many
low-income rural and urban households in lowincome nations.
The very survival of some small island
nations and low-income nations is in doubt as
much of their land area is at risk from sea-level
rise, yet their contributions to global greenhouse
emissions have been very small. There are also
tens of millions of people in low- and middleincome nations whose homes and livelihoods
are at risk from sea-level rise and storms, yet
they have made very little contribution to global
warming. With regard to cities, in economic
terms, it may be easy to write off the cities most
at risk from climate change, but what will this
do to international relations? One wonders what
new levels of violence and international terrorism will be generated as increasing numbers of
people lose their homes, assets, livelihoods and
cultural heritages to global warming – especially
when the main causes of this global warming
are strongly associated with the lifestyles of
high-income groups in high-income nations,
and the reasons for their losses is the failure of
high-income nations to cut back their emissions?
Would the US government oppose the Kyoto
Protocol’s modest targets for emission reductions
if Washington DC, New York and Los Angeles faced
risks comparable to those facing Dhaka, Mumbai
and Bangkok today as a result of greenhouse gas
emissions the US had not generated?

EDITORIAL

VIII. THE NEED FOR ACTION
The initial response to climate change by the
scientific community was to focus on the need
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It seemed
wrong to focus on adaptation to the impacts of
climate change because this was only needed
if emissions were not reduced. It also seemed
unfair in that most adaptation would have to be
done in nations with very limited resources and
very limited contributions to climate change. In
addition, there are other pressing developmental
needs, and thus the worry that focusing on
adapting to climate change would draw attention
and resources away from these.
But the need to focus on adaptation has
been much increased by the failure among highincome nations to act to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. There is also the worrying time lag
between when emissions are reduced and when
this reduces climate change; emissions already
released will be driving climate change for the
next 10–20 years, even if dramatic emissions
reductions are achieved in the next few years.
For sea-level rise, the time lag is even greater.
So however unfair this is, action is still needed
everywhere – to reduce emissions, to adapt
to reduce risks. And action is needed in each
locality, with actions that are tailored to the
specifics of that locality – which means a need
for local government to have the knowledge,
capacity and legitimacy to act effectively. The
earlier that action is taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to adjust the drivers of
urban development to contribute to reducing the
vulnerability of settlements to climate change,
the lower the costs.
There are those who still argue that development needs are so pressing that any attention to
climate change diverts attention and resources
from more immediate needs – the billions of
people who have difficulty meeting their food
needs and who lack basic services. There is also
the worry that any action on climate change
will not only draw resources from more pressing
immediate needs but also will be twisted by
local, national and international interests to
serve themselves. Building over-expensive and
often ill-considered flood defences can generate
very large profits. The risks of this happening
are much enhanced where mechanisms of
accountability to citizens and civil society for

government investments, or loans taken to fund
such investments, are weak. If the need to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions were less pressing,
there would be a strong case for saying that
this was entirely the responsibility of the rich
world. But one of the key determinants of future
greenhouse gas emissions is how cities develop
in the more prosperous low- and middle-income
nations (which is also where most of the world’s
population growth is being accommodated). Are
the rapidly expanding and successful cities in
China, India, Brazil, South Africa, etc. increasing
or decreasing the dependence of middle- and
upper-income groups on private car use? Are the
houses and apartments favoured by middle- and
upper-income groups increasing or decreasing
the consumption of carbon-based fuels or
electricity generated by the combustion of such
fuels? Are enterprises in these cities successfully
encouraged to invest in measures to reduce their
direct and indirect contributions to greenhouse
gas emissions? Here too, there are important
potential co-benefits, as many measures to reduce
carbon emissions can also reduce air pollution
and greatly improve air quality. The precedents
are there to show how much can be done(19) – but
these precedents remain the exceptions, not the
rule. In addition, to date, most of the discussion
in relation to cities has been on reducing
emissions, not on needed adaptation. The paper
by Pierre Mukheibir and Gina Ziervogel discusses
the development of a Municipal Adaptation
Plan (MAP) for climate change for Cape Town,
and the steps and methods needed to do this.
This is also an example of how local adaptation
needs a strong local information base and local
governance systems that allow voice and influence to poorer groups.
Adaptation plans must also bring benefits to
the billion urban dwellers who currently live in
very poor quality housing, in tenements, cheap
boarding houses and illegal or informal settlements. These billion people include a large part
of the population whose homes and livelihoods
are most at risk from climate change. As Patricia
Romero Lankao’s paper discusses, a technologydriven, market-led response to climate change
does little for them. In addition, there are often

19. The two issues of Environment & Urbanization published in
2006 on ecological urbanization included many case studies
showing these possibilities.

13

E N V I R O N M E N T & U R B A N I Z AT I O N

pressing local concerns: it should be difficult politically to get serious action on reducing carbon
emissions in a city where much of the population
lacks provision for piped water, sanitation and
drainage.
But many local adaptation measures for
climate change can also support better quality,
more secure housing provided with sewers,
drains and other measures to protect them from
storms and floods. The kinds of changes needed
in urban planning and governance to “climate
proof” cities are often supportive of development
goals. But as discussed already, they could also
do the opposite – as plans and investments to
cope with storms and sea-level rise forcibly clear
the settlements that are currently on floodplains, or the informal settlements that are close
to the coast. Most city governments in Africa,
Asia and Latin America have not found ways to
support low-income households in finding and
moving to land on which they can develop their
homes on safe, secure, well-located sites. Yet for
many coastal cities, the need to achieve this will
multiply if they are to adapt to climate change.
So there is a clear urban agenda. But where
is the evidence of national governments and
international agencies responding to this? In
most nations, national and state/provincial governments still concentrate most of the power
and the control over public investments. Most
international agencies and development banks
reinforce the power of central governments, as
their funding goes through central governments.
Unfortunately, too many city-level policy makers
see climate change as a global issue that is not
their concern. In addition, too many climate
change experts see urban change as a local issue
that they do not need to understand, let alone
address. It is within urban centres and urban
governments that so much of the battle to prevent climate change from becoming a global
catastrophe will be won or lost – at least for the
human species. Yet when urban governments
do try to respond, they receive little support.
Hopefully this will change as the full import of
the challenge becomes apparent. Since most of
the growth in the world’s population over the
next few decades will be in urban centres in
low- and middle-income nations, this can be
seen as an opportunity to plan and manage their
expansion in ways that enhance their resilience
(especially for their lower-income citizens) and
support much lower greenhouse gas emissions

14

Vol 19 No 1 April 2007

– rather than enhancing their vulnerability and
increasing their greenhouse gas emissions (as
seems to be the case at present).

POSTSCRIPT
A Royal Commission Report produced for the UK
government on East Africa: Wishing “…to emphasize the
importance of finding an answer to the problems which have
been created by the rapidity with which urban areas have
developed. We consider that in the past, too little attention
has been paid by East African governments to the problems
which arise from this development…”. A report presented
by the Secretary of State to the UK Parliament, 1955.

REFERENCES
Cabannes, Yves (2004), “Participatory budgeting: a
significant contribution to participatory democracy”, Environment & Urbanization Vol 16, No 1,
April, pages 27–46.
Environment & Urbanization Vol 13, No 2 (October
2001).
Environment & Urbanization Vol 18, Nos 1&2 (April and
October 2006).
Hardoy, Jorge E, Diana Mitlin and David Satterthwaite
(2001), Environmental Problems in an Urbanizing
World: Finding Solutions for Cities in Africa, Asia and
Latin America, Earthscan Publications, London,
448 pages.
IPCC (2001), Climate Change 2001; Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability, Contribution of Working Group II to
the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1,032 pages.
Menegat, Rualdo (2002), “Participatory democracy
and sustainable development: integrated urban
environmental management in Porto Alegre,
Brazil”, Environment & Urbanization Vol 14, No 2,
October, pages 181–206.
Nicholls R J (2004), “Coastal flooding and wetland
loss in the 21st century: changes under the SRES
climate and socioeconomic scenarios”, Global
Environmental Change Vol 14, No 1, pages 69–86.
Patel, Sheela, Celine d’Cruz and Sundar Burra (2002),
“Beyond evictions in a global city; peoplemanaged resettlement in Mumbai”, Environment &
Urbanization Vol 14, No 1, April, pages 159–172.
Souza, Celina (2001), “Participatory budgeting in
Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities in build-ing
democratic institutions”, Environment & Urbanization Vol 13, No 1, April, pages 159–184.
UN–Habitat (2003), Water and Sanitation in the World’s
Cities; Local Action for Global Goals, Earthscan
Publications, London, 274 pages.

EDITORIAL
Weru, Jane (2004), “Community federations and
city upgrading: the work of Pamoja Trust and
Muungano in Kenya”, Environment & Urbanization
Vol 16, No 1, April, pages 47–62.
WHO (1992), Our Planet, Our Health, World Health
Organization, Geneva.

www.actionaid.org.
www.em-dat.net.
www.grida.no/climate/ipcc/regional/index.htm.
www.sdinet.org.
www.worldbank.org/reference/.

CLIMATE CHANGE 2007
The 4th Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
On 6 April 2007, the report Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability will be released; this is IPCC
Working Group II’s contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report. It includes chapters on assessments of future
impacts and adaptation relating to industry, settlement and society, human health, freshwater resources and their
management, and coastal systems and low-lying areas; it also has chapters on each of the world’s regions, and
chapters on assessments of responses to impacts.
The report of Working Group I, on The Physical Science Basis, was released on 2 February; the report of Working
Group III, on Mitigation of Climate Change, will be released on 4 May 2007.
For more details of these and other IPCC publications, see http://www.ipcc.ch/

15

